Market Insights | Markets | Foreign Exchange
* 2 Mins Read: GS Debt-Ceiling Updates...
FICC and Equities | 17 May 2023 | 11:58AM UTC
Latest updates/views on the US debt-ceiling from around the GS floor:
§

§

§

§

Alec Phillips (Y/day): Base-case that Treasury’s cash balance will drop to minimal
levels June 8-13, while remaining positive (although some risk that cash fully
exhausted by 8-9 June); 15th Jan tax-deadline would replenish cash-reserves and then
push x-date back to late-July. At moment, both sides treating early June as a hard
deadline, would elevate risks if they started to view that date as more ‘soft’.
Constructive tone to negotiations, but still not expecting real progress until much
closer to the deadline
Mike Cahill (Today): Two positive signs of progress in the talks yesterday: i) Biden
announcing that he will cut his Asia trip short is a tangible marker they are working
towards a deal; ii) Decision to narrow the negotiating teams a sign that talks have
moved to a more advanced stage. Relatively small tax receipt intake of $1.6bn
(announced last night) focusing minds on early June deadline. The way the calendar
falls, as highlighted by Alec, presents a risk that Treasury might have to delay some
payments if there is no agreement over the next couple of weeks, but lowers the risk
that a debt payment will be at risk
Simon Costello: USDJPY vol market prices just 1.5 extra days of variance relating to
the debt ceiling through the summer; roughly 1/3rd for early June and 2/3rd midJul+. This equates to ~75bps of gap risk if combined for one day. We think aggregate
weights screen as low and like owning ATM gamma for early June; the real left tail
likely comes further into July.
Kristian Brauten-Smith: XXXJPY levels offer better selling opportunities here, our
bias being to run short USDJPY vs 138.00/20. The widely held belief that the issue
needs to get worse before getting better may lead to relatively lacklustre moves in
G10 compared to what we thought at the end of April, but still scope to venture 35% lower in Yen crosses (vs the 5-7% previously pencilled in).

Adam
Alec Phillips (Chief US Political Economist) summarised: “Our central scenario is still that
the Treasury’s cash balance will drop to minimal levels from June 8-13 (a June 15 tax deadline
will boost the cash balance) but it is more likely than not to remain positive during that
period; we believe there is a high probability that Treasury will exhaust resources by late July.
That said, growth in withheld tax receipts appears to be on a downtrend so, while not our
central scenario, there is a clear risk that Treasury fully exhausts its cash by June 8-9. Given
this, and the practical risks that even a low but positive cash balance poses to Treasury debt
management, Treasury's projection of an early June deadline is very understandable. For now,
we think that both sides are treating early June as a hard deadline, though there is a risk that
some lawmakers might come to regard this as a "soft" deadline if they do not expect the
Treasury to deplete its cash during those few days in early June. Markets have recently taken
comfort in Biden’s constructive tone and the seeming intensity of negotiations—a week ago, it
was unclear whether the White House would even engage in negotiations over spending
changes along with the debt limit increase. That said, we do not think many, if any, market

participants expected real progress until much closer to the deadline, so little headway made
after the first week of talks should hardly come as a surprise.”
Full note here
Mike Cahill (FX Strategy): “There were two positive signs of progress in the talks yesterday.
First, President Biden announcing that he will cut his Asia trip short, while not unexpected, is
a tangible marker that they are working towards a deal with the early June deadline in mind.
Second, the decision to narrow the negotiating teams is a sign that talks have moved to a more
advanced stage.
Yesterday’s relatively small tax receipt intake of $1.6bn, together with Treasury Yellen’s
updated guidance, clears another bit of uncertainty and helps focus the deadline. From a
markets standpoint, it’s encouraging that leaders appear to be taking the early June deadline
seriously. That said, the way the calendar is shaping up as Alec outlines above presents a clear
risk that Treasury might have to delay some payments if there is no agreement over the next
couple of weeks, but at the same time the schedule probably lowers the risk that a debt
payment will be at risk. For that reason, I think markets will continue to treat the debt ceiling
as a second order risk—much the same as it was in the Summer 2011 debt ceiling standoff
when Greek banks dominated headlines and market moves.”
With tax receipts on a downtrend, there is a clear risk that Treasury fully exhausts its cash by
June 8-9

Simon Costello (Pac-Rim FX Options Trading): “The USDJPY vol market prices just 1.5 extra
days of variance relating to the debt ceiling through the summer. This is spit roughly 1/3rd for
early June and 2/3rd mid-Jul+. The total 1.5days equates to ~75bps of gap risk if combined for
one day. We view the aggregate weights as being quite low and think we can ultimately price
roughly double the current dayweights if the situation deteriorates from here.
Positioning is actually very light and we have fielded more questions on the subject than firm
price requests. The flows relating to this theme have mostly focused on the mid/late July
period as per GIR’s central scenario and have largely been via outright OTM puts (rather than
leveraged plays) from hedge funds and some RM names. We did see some demand for ATM
gamma over the early June dates, mostly from vol accounts.

We generally agree with our franchise’s intuition here; we too view June as a more symmetric
period for which we like owning ATM gamma (includes scope for a resolution) and we think
the real left tail likely comes further into July. Big picture, 3m JPY vol is around 1year lows and
prices below 1m, 2m & 3m realized vol. 3m 130 puts for ~85bps are an attractive hedge to a
potential growth shock over the summer.”
Kristian Brauten-Smith (G10 FX Trading): “The markets conviction on what is the correct FX
hedge for a debt ceiling impasse is lower compared to the end of April. The small sample size
when studying previous episodes, the lack of confidence attributing any of those moves in FX
specifically to the debt ceiling, paired with frustrating price action in consensus trades more
generally over the past two weeks, puts FX positioning for the possible escalation at the lighter
end of recent extremes.
However, we still believe that risk pairs should be contained into the beginning of June, and
that XXXJPY levels offer better selling opportunities here with our bias being to run short
USDJPY vs 138.00/20. The widely held belief that the issue needs to get worse before getting
better may lead to relatively lacklustre moves in G10 compared to what we thought at the end
of April, but there is still scope to venture 3-5% lower in Yen crosses (vs the 5-7% previously
pencilled in).
Spot has a tendency to attempt to play events a couple of moves ahead, so were the market to
get comfortable that a ~1 week problem-period early June would kick start more constructive
conversations between both sides, any such dip in risk may prove short lived. We prefer to
position from now into the end of May, but retain a cautious approach and set a relatively high
bar to blindly adding in June.”

