Market Insights
Markets
FICC and Equities | 17 May 2023 | 6:43AM UTC
Another session of lacklustre price action with Europe closing around unchanged yet again
[SX5E -2bps], whilst US spent most of the session range-bound (~4,120-4,130) only to
break lower into the bell [SPX -64bps]. Price action in Asia overnight consistent with the
previous session with Japan the only green spot.
Will get some sense after expiry as to how much dealers long gamma position is capping the
market moves ($1.9bn last estimates). Whilst this certainly feels like a prevalent dynamic at
play, also feels like the general macro and micro backdrop is also holding us in a state of
paralysis. The dip lower into the close yesterday is a reminder that equities have been
somewhat underappreciating the imminent debt ceiling breach as the tumble in S&P was
largely cited on headlines that Biden will shorten his Asia trip amidst negotiations, implying
limited progress on talks thus far. Whilst VIX hovering around multi-year lows does not
speak to a market with much event risk priced in, think this current impasse just adds to the
list of overhangs that are discouraging much activity in this market (volumes yesterday
once again below average). Elsewhere, the data remains difficult to call and whilst signs of
recession and depressed growth clearly are not good for risk, equally strong data (Retail
Sales and Industrial and Manufacturing production yesterday), adds fuel to the fire that the
Fed may need to hike again coming into June. Equally not helpful on the latter point is that
of the Fed speakers so far this week (reminder 19 in total, ending with Powell on Friday),
the tone has been between ‘wait and see’ and erring on the slightly more hawkish side
(yesterday, Barker ‘comfortable’ with more increases, whilst Mester stated that she believes
rates aren’t yet sufficiently restricted). Feels like rates markets might be waking up more to
the possibility that the Fed’s hiking path could be extended (Fed funds implying 20%
chance of June hike, versus ~0% last week), however hard to say the same of equities. To
that point markets instead trading more a path of ‘flight to quality’ and Growth rather than
even ‘flight to safety’ (as Bond Proxies underperformed yesterday), with narrow breadth as
investors continue to pile into the Growth / megacap Tech trade (multiple catalysts, but
more predicated on rate cuts than more hikes). This is evident in PB data from Monday
recording Info Tech as by far the most notionally net bought sector (+1.8 s.d. versus one
year) and also continues to be apparent in price action (MAGMA accounted for 144% of S&P
move yesterday).
Equal weighted S&P lagging S&P and Megacap Tech performance

Lauren Rowe
Equities Sales Trading
Securities Division

